# Preface

> **ro·bot** */ˈrōˌbät/*  
> 1. machine capable of carrying out a complex series of actions automatically.  
> 2. (esp. in science fiction) A machine resembling a human being and able to
>    replicate certain human movements and functions.

Robots. Usually at the centre of epic science fiction adventures whether they
are the deadly T-1000 from The Terminator or the fun and friendly WALL-E. The
first written accounts of "robots" were from the 3rd century BC in ancient
China. It wasn't until after the 1950s that computers and robotics became
rapidly increasing in complexity and numbers. Fast forwarding to the present
day, we have robots like ASIMO and programmable quadrobot robots.

People began moving the concept of a robot into the virtual world of the
Internet. Internet Relay Chat or IRC as it is more commonly known is a chat
protocol that allowed people to create channels and chat with different users
from all over the world. People created IRC bots which would join IRC and appear
to be normal users, however they usually had built in artificial intelligence
and respond to various "commands" issued by other users in the channel. The
oldest known IRC bots where Bill Wisher's Bartender and Greg Lindahl's GM (Game
Manager for the Hunt the Wumpus game).

Different methods of communicating online became available ranging from AOL
Instant Messenger to ICQ and more recent services like 37signal's Campfire or
HipChat. "Bots" have been written for these services offering functionality such
as the following.

  * Logging messages from chat
  * Hosting trivia games
  * Automating administrative tasks
  * And more recently... sticking moustaches on random images.

This brings us to Hubot. You have most likely heard about GitHub if you are
reading this. Hubot was original an internal projects that GitHub used for
automating many tasks. They often teased audiences at conference talks with
explaining and demonstrating their usage of Hubot.

After a while GitHub open sourced Hubot and released it to the world. I
initially contributed to things to the repository namely the original Twilio
adapter. I was contacted by Corey Donohoe after a number of contributions who
asked if I would like to help maintain Hubot, I accepted and maintain Hubot ever
since.

And on that note it's time to get on with the shoe and learn what this Hubot is
all about.
