# Deploying Hubot

Before you're able to deploy Hubot you are going to need to install the `hubot`
npm package that we will use to create your own Hubot. First check you have Node
and `npm` installed.

    $ node -v
    v0.10.13
    $ npm -v
    1.3.4

## Getting Started

If you have Node and `npm` installed you're ready to install the `hubot` and
`coffee-script` packages.

    $ npm install -g hubot coffee-script

This will install `hubot` and `coffee-script` globally so you can run the
`hubot` and `coffee` commands from the terminal. Check that they have installed
correctly by checking the versions which are installed.

    $ hubot -v
    2.6.1
    $ coffee -v
    CoffeeScript version 1.6.3

If you're seeing the versions outputted you're ready to create your Hubot. The
`hubot` command has a `--create` switch that will create a directory structure
for a Hubot that is designed to be deployed to Heroku.

    $ hubot --create myhubot

You should see some output about copying files into the path to your Hubot. This
is the initial directory structure for a deployable Hubot. You should have `git`
installed so we're able to initialise this directory as a repository and add the
files to it.

    $ cd myhubot
    $ git init
    $ git add .
    $ git commit -m "Initial commit"

Heroku uses `git` to deploy to their infrastructure. It's also good to version
your changes to your Hubot incase you need to roll something back or work on a
script in a different branch before deploying it to Heroku.

You can test the Hubot locally using the `shell` adapter by just running
`bin/hubot`, this will also install the `npm` dependencies for you. The `shell`
adapter is mainly used for local development on Hubot or any scripts.

    $ bin/hubot
    Hubot>

You may see some warning and/or info logging which are useful for debugging if
you come into issues. Using the `shell` adapter you're able to interact with
Hubot as though he were deployed.

    Hubot> hubot help
    ...
    Hubot <user> doesn't have <role> role - Removes a role from a user
    Hubot <user> has <role> role - Assigns a role to a user
    Hubot <user> is a badass guitarist - assign a role to a user
    Hubot <user> is not a badass guitarist - remove a role from a user
    ...
    Hubot>

If you type `hubot help` you'll get some help output for the loaded scripts. The
output will depend upon which scripts Hubot has loaded. You'll learn more about
scripts in a later chapter. For now you'll mainly be introduced to the default
scripts.

Next you will probably want to rename your Hubot from `Hubot` to something more
unique for you or your company. We'll use the name `Hubbert` for the examples in
this book. To rename your Hubot you just need to pass the `--name` option when
running Hubot.

    $ bin/hubot --name Hubbert
    Hubbert>

Now instead when you direct commands to your Hubot you'll be able to use
`Hubbert` instead of `Hubot`. The name is case insensitive when directing
commands and can optionally be prefixed with `@` or suffixed with `:`.

    Hubbert> hubbert help
    Hubbert> Hubbert help
    Hubbert> @hubbert help
    Hubbert> hubbert: help

This is useful if your preferred chat applications has any form of tab
completion for names and added `@` or `:` to the name.

## Deploying Hubot on Heroku

Heroku is a cloud application platform that you can use to easily deploy Ruby,
Node, Clojure, Java, Python and even Scala applications to. It's free to sign
up and create an account. If you've installed the Heroku Toolbelt you should
have the `heroku` command available and ready to use.

    $ heroku version
    heroku-toolbelt/2.39.5 (x86_64-darwin12.4.0) ruby/2.0.0

If you haven't authenticated the `heroku` command with your Heroku account
you'll want to do that before you're able to deploy to Heroku.

    $ heroku auth:login
    Enter your Heroku credentials.
    Email: email@domain.com
    Password:
    Authentication successful.

You're now ready to create the app on Heroku so you can push your Hubot to
Heroku.

    $ heroku create
    Creating rocky-atoll-1371... done, stack is cedar
    http://rocky-atoll-1371.herokuapp.com/ | git@heroku.com:rocky-atoll-1371.git
    Git remote heroku added

This creates the "app" on Heroku, and adds the remote `git` repository as a
remote to the local repository you created earlier. Before you're able to push
your Hubot to Heroku you will need to set some configuration variables for the
adapter you're using and Hubot. We're going to assume you've signed up for a
free Campfire account. Using other available adapters is going to be looked at
in a later chapter.

You should have created a new "user" on your Campfire account for this Hubot.
You won't be able to use your own account.

Hubot requires three pieces of information for using the Campfire adapter.

  * Subdomain for the account (**youraccount**.campfirenow.com)
  * API token for the user (found in **My Info** when you login as the user)
  * Comman separate list of room IDs (these are found in the URL when you're in
    that room)

Now once you've noted down those three pieces of information you can use the
`heroku` command to add those configuration variables.

    $ heroku config:add HUBOT_CAMPFIRE_ACCOUNT=thehubotbook
    $ heroku config:add HUBOT_CAMPFIRE_TOEN=f2269166594249095d962d1c0cfd69b
    $ heroku config:add HUBOT_CAMPFIRE_ROOMS=403967,403966,403964

If you're changing your Hubots name you will need to edit the `Procfile` in your
Hubot directory.

    web: bin/hubot -a campfire -n <name for your hubot>

Save that file and then you'll need to commit the changes to the `git`
repository.

    $ git add Procfile
    $ git commit -m "Change the name"

Finally you'll need to set the configuration variable for the URL of your Heroku
app. This is so that Hubot can ping himself because Heroku will sleep a web
process every hour if it's idle.

    $ heroku config:add HEROKU_URL=http://rocky-atoll-1371.herokuapp.com

Now you're finally set to deploy your Hubot to Heroku! Check that the `heroku`
remote exists in your `git` repository. If not you will need to manually add it.

    $ git remote
    heroku

If it doesn't exist you can do the following command to add it.

    $ git remote add heroku git@heroku.com:<your app name>.git

You should push the `master` branch to the `heroku` remote repository and Heroku
will have a hook that will install/compile the dependencies and launch your
Hubot.

    $ git push heroku master

If every thing went to plan you should eventually see your Hubot join the
specified rooms. If you're having issues you can read back over these
instructions and make sure you didn't miss a step. If it still isn't working you
can open an issue on the Hubot repository, make sure you provide any logs from
Heroku which you can get with the `heroku` command, also make sure not to
include any sensitive information in the issue.

    $ heroku logs

## Deploying Hubot on UNIX

**WIP**
