# Adapters

Hubot comes with two build in adapters, Campfire and Shell. There are also many
third party adapters which people have built.

  * HipChat
  * IRC
  * Google Talk
  * Flowdock
  * iMessage
  * ... and many more

Using an alternative third party adapter is very simple and requires minimal
configuration. We will use the `hubot-irc` adapter as an example, although most
adapters will follow similar steps for configuration. You should be able to
consult the `README` on the GitHub repository for the various adapters.

In the later chapter about the internals of Hubot you'll learn specifically what
the job of the adapter is, but for now you only need to understand that an
adapter is the thing that makes Hubot run on the different services.

## Using an Adapter

Your Hubot is ready to deploy but you wish to use the `hubot-irc` adapter. You
will need to open the `package.json` file in your text editor of choice.

You will need to add the `hubot-irc` package as a dependency. This means adding
the package and version into the "dependencies" section of the JSON.

{lang="text"}
    {
      ...
      "dependencies": {
        "hubot": "2.6.1",
        "hubot-scripts": "2.5.1",
        "hubot-irc": "0.1.17"
      },
      ...
    }

The line `"hubot-irc": "0.1.17"` was added. You will need to tell Hubot to use
this adapter. If you're deploying to Heroku you will need to edit the `Procfile`
again and change the `-a` switch to `-a irc` instead of `-a campfire`. If you're
running Hubot on a local machine you'll want to change the command you run.

You should commit the changes to `package.json` and the `Procfile` if you
changed it.

The IRC adapter has its own configuration variables that you will need to set
using the `heroku` command if you're deploying to Heroku or setting them as
environment variables on the machine if you're deploying locally.

There are three required configuration options and a number of optional options.
The options you have to set will vary depending on the adapter you are using.
They should be documented in the adapters related repository on GitHub in the
`README`.

  * `HUBOT_IRC_SERVER` the server you want your Hubot to join
  * `HUBOT_IRC_NICK` the name of your Hubot
  * `HUBOT_IRC_ROOMS` a comma separated list of channel names including the
    hash (#)

When you now deploy your Hubot to Heroku or your local machine you should see
your Hubot join the service which you've set him up to use.

## Wrap Up: Adapters

So you've reached the end of this chapter on adapters. Hopefully you've learnt
what an adapter for Hubot is. If you're not using the Campfire adapter you
should have learnt how to get Hubot running on the service you use using the
relevant adapter. The next chapter is going to introduce you to scripts, which
are the parts that make Hubot do things.
