# Scripts

Now your Hubot is set up and running, you're wondering what hell can it actually
do right? Remember that scene from The Matrix where they're implanting Neo with
all the different martial arts training? This is similar to how Hubot works. Out
of the box he can barely give a fifth grader a run for their money. That's why
the concept of Hubot scripts exists. They teach Hubot everything you want him to
know and do.

## What are Scripts?

Scripts in Hubot are individual Node modules that encapsulate a piece of
functionality that Hubot should have. It is typicall you give Hubot some input
and he'll give your some output. The functionality of scripts can range from the
silly to the useful, displaying anitmated GIFs to managing a continuous
integration server.

The is a community collection of scripts in the Hubot Scripts repository. This
is a massive (over 200+ scripts) of community submitted scripts for Hubot. Later
in the book you'll learn how to fork that repository and contribute your own
scripts back via pull requests.

## Using Hubot Scripts

When you created your Hubot the `hubot-scripts` dependency is already added to
your `package.json` file. You will also see a `hubot-scripts.json` file as well
in the root of your Hubot repository. This file tells Hubot which of the scripts
you wish to load when your Hubot starts. This lets your look at all the scripts
in the Hubot Scripts repository and choose which ones you wish to use without
having to load the entire lot!

## Picking Hubot Scripts

So you want to include that awesome script that displays the funny animated GIF
to help motivate your coworkers (or annoy)? We'll use the imaginary
`funny-gif.coffee` script as an example of adding a script from Hubot Scripts.

You are going to need to open the `hubot-scripts.json` file in your text editor
of choice. In a default `hubot-scripts.json` file you should see something like
the following.

    ["redis-brain.coffee","shipit.coffee"]

This means that your Hubot will be loading the `redis-brain.coffee` script which
is used for persisting your Hubots brain to a Redis intance. Also the
`shipit.coffee` script is loaded which displays random ship it squirrel images
when someone mentions "shipit". To add the script (`funny-gif.coffee` for
demonstration purposes) you just need to append it to the end of the JSON array.
You should take care editing the JSON as it will fail to load if it's improperly
formatted. I like to reformat the JSON so each script is on its own line.

    [
      "redis-brain.coffee",
      "shipit.coffee",
      "funny-gif.coffee"
    ]

Add your script to the array and remember the trailing commas for the array!
Additionally it's useful to order the scripts alphabetically so they're easy to
find in the list.

You'll want to commit this change to your Hubot repository so you're able to
deploy it to Heroku or locally.

## Updating Hubot Scripts

New scripts get added and old scripts get bugs fixed in the Hubot Scripts
repository. This means when a new release comes out you have to tell your Hubot
to use the newer release. This is really simple!

Open the `package.json` in your Hubot repository in your text editor of choice
and look for the `hubot-scripts` line in the dependencies and update the version
number to the version of Hubot Scripts which was released.

Before

    "dependencies": {
      "hubot": "2.6.1",
      "hubot-scripts": "2.5.0"
      ...
    }

After

    "dependencies": {
      "hubot": "2.6.1",
      "hubot-scripts": "2.5.1"
      ...
    }

You should commit that change to your Hubot repository then deploy to Heroku or
locally. If you're deploying locally you may need to do `npm update` to force
the dependencies to update. This will happen automatically on Heroku.

If everything went well, your Hubot should now be using the latest release of
Hubot Scripts. You can also now pick any scripts that may have been added in
that release by following the details in the above section.

## Wrap Up: Scripts

So at the end of this chapter you should have learnt what Hubot Scripts are and
how to pick the ones you wish to use for your Hubot. Now you're itching to write
your own scripts for Hubot, and that's what we're going to look at in the next
chapter all about writing Hubot scripts.
