# Internal HTTP Server

Hubot has an internal HTTP server built in using Express. This allows scripts to
specify "routes" in Hubot that can be handled by Express internally.

## Getting Started

By default the internal HTTP server is enabled. There is also a default script
that exposes some routes that you can check out.

  * `GET /hubot/version` - will return the version as the response body
  * `POST /hubot/ping` - will return "PONG" as the response body
  * `GET /hubot/time` - will return the current server time as the response body
  * `GET /hubot/info` - will return some info around the hubot process as the
    response body
  * `GET /hubot/ip` - will return the external IP of the hubot as the response
    body.

The basics of a HTTP handler in Hubot is a route and a callback to call when
there is a request made to that route using the specified HTTP method.

## Hello World

Let's write a simple "Hello World" script for the internal HTTP server. Create
and open `scripts/http-hello-word.coffee` in your text editor of choice. We'll
create a few examples to show of the basics of the internal HTTP server.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    module.exports = (robot) ->
      robot.router.get "/hello", (req, res) ->
        res.end "Hello"

This is a very simple example that will send the response body "Hello" to anyone
that requests `/hello`. As the internal HTTP server is built on Express you can
also use parameters in routes and get the specified values.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    module.exports = (robot) ->
      robot.router.get "/hello/:name", (req, res) ->
        res.end "Hello, #{req.params.name}"

Now if you request "/hello/Jim" the response will contain the body "Hello, Jim".
These examples are pretty trivial. Next we'll look at what we can do with the
request and response arguments to the callbacks.

## Requests and Responses

The requests and responses are exactly the same as the ones outlined in the
Express documentation. So if you're looking for more in-depth documentation
around these then the the Express documentation is worth the read. We'll look at
some of the useful things you might wish to do with the request and responses in
Hubot.

### Request

The first useful property on the `request` argument is `params`. The `params`
property is an object containing key/value pairs of any route parameters. So for
example in the above example we had the `/hello/:name` route which has a `name`
parameter. The value of this parameter in the route would be available on the
`req.params` as `name`.

Next is the `query` property which contains key/value pairs of any query string
parameters. So for example `/hello?name=Tom` would make the value of `name`
available on `req.query.name`.

The `bodyParser()` middleware which parses JSON, URL encoded and multipart forms
and makes them available on the `req.body` property. For example if we sent a
`POST` request with the following form data we would be able to access the data
on the `req.body` property.

{lang="text"}
    POST user[name]=Tom&user[email]=hello@tomb.io

You can then access a `user` property which then as the `name` and `email`
properties with the respective values. If a `POST` request was made with the
following JSON then it would be parsed as also made available.

{lang="text"}
    POST { "name": "Tom", "email": "hello@tomb.io" }

You can then access the `req.body.name` and `req.body.email` properties for the
respective values.

You can get the remote address from the `ip` property on `req`. This is useful
if you wish to have some sort of whitelisting based on IP addresses for your
Hubots HTTP server.

For more details about the other properties available on the request please
refer to the Express documentation.

### Response

The `response` argument is used for handling the response that will be sent back
to the client that made the HTTP request. The first function on response that is
useful is `status()`, this allows you to set the HTTP status code for the
response.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.status(404).end("Not found!")

The next pair of useful functions are `set()` and `get()` which allow you to set
and get HTTP header values respectively.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.set 'Content-Type': 'text/plain'

You're also able to pass an object with key/value pairs of headers to the
`set()` function.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.get 'Content-Type' # => 'text/plain'

There is a `cookie()` function which you can use to set cookie values and access
them from later requests.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.cookie 'name', 'tom'

You can also clear cookies using the `clearCookie()` function.

You may wish to redirect the request to another location, and the `redirect()`
function is used for this. It can take an optional status as the first
argument, it defaults to 302.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.redirect 'http://google.com'
    res.redirect 301, '/login'

The most useful function is `send()` which lets you send a crafted response back
to the client. You can send text, JSON and even set the status code and header
values.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.send "<html><body><h1>Hello world</h1></body></html>"
    res.send some: 'json'
    res.send 404, 'Sorry I was unable to find that!'
    res.send 200

When a `String` argument is passed the `Content-Type` is defaulted to
`text/html`.

When an `Array` or `Object` are given, then a JSON respresentation will be the
response.

Finally when a `Number` is given on it's own it will use that as the status code
and a default response body string will be generated for you.

If you plan to send JSON responses it is better to use the `json()` function
which will go through a more explicit JSON conversation and handle non-object
values like `null` and `undefined`.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    res.json null
    res.json name: 'tom'
    res.json 500, error: 'message'

As with the `request` argument, there are more details on the Express
documentation if you wish to learn more about the properties and functions
available on the `response` argument.

## Sending Messages to Rooms

The internal HTTP server makes Hubot a good choice for the endpoint of web hooks
for various online services. So when you receive a `POST` request from a web
service you may want to send a message to a room that your Hubot is in.

Hubot has a built in function called `messageRoom` that will let you send a
message to a room that Hubot is in. It has two arguments, the room identifier
and any messages you wish to send.

{lang="coffeescript"}
    robot.messageRoom 12345, 'Hello world!'

This will allow you to send any messages to rooms in any HTTP handlers that you
may wish to create.

## Wrap Up: Internal HTTP Server

That wraps up this chapter on the internal HTTP server in Hubot. Hopefully
you've learnt how to utilise the internal HTTP server for your own needs. You
can checkout the scripts in the Hubot Scripts repository and see how other
people use the internal HTTP server. In the next chapter you'll learn how to
contribute your scripts to the Hubot Scripts repository or even push it as a
third party `npm` package for Hubot.
