# Releasing Your Scripts

## Getting Started

You've built your awesome script for Hubot and you're ready to share it with the
rest of the world. There are two supported ways for releasing your script to
everyone. Contributing your script to Hubot Scripts or building an external
`npm` package. We'll go over both methods and you'll be able to pick which best
suits your workflow.

In the future the external `npm` package method will become the preferred method
of releasing Hubot scripts as it allows people to specify dependencies and add
tests via preferred methods.

## Adding to Hubot Scripts

Adding your script to the Hubot Scripts repository is basically adding your
script to the massive collection of scripts in the `hubot-scripts` npm package.
This method has its pros and cons. Lets take a look at the pros and cons and why
you might pick this method over the one described later in this chapter.

The pros of this method are mainly that once you've contributed your script to
the Hubot Scripts repository you don't really have to maintain it in anyway
unless you've fixed issues that you fixed when you're using it.

The cons are that you can't include dependencies in the main `package.json`
because not everyone will be using your script. There aren't any idiomatic tests
in Hubot Scripts because there is over 200 scripts in the repository.

The cons of this method are some of the main reasons that the external `npm`
package method is becoming the preferred method of releasing Hubot scripts. If
your script is fairly trivial and simple then adding it to the Hubot Scripts
repository is the method you should use.

### Forking Hubot Scripts

**WIP**

### Adding Your Scripts

**WIP**

### Sending a Pull Request

**WIP**

## Creating an NPM Package

**WIP**

### Creating the Package

**WIP**

### Pushing Your Package

**WIP**

## Wrap Up: Releasing Your Scripts

**WIP**
